docs/content/punpy_digital_effects_table.rst, before:

.. Overview of method
   Author: Pieter De Vis
   Email: pieter.de.vis@npl.co.uk
   Created: 15/04/20

.. _punpy_digital_effects_table:

punpy in combination with digital effects tables
=======================================================
In this section we explain how punpy can be used for propagating uncertainties in digital effects tables through a measurement function.
For details on how to create these digital effects tables, we refer to the `obsarray documentation <>`_.
Once the digital effects tables are created, this is the most concise method for propagating uncertainties.
The code in this section is just as illustration and we refer to the Examples Section for example with all requied information for running punpy.
The punpy package can propagate the various types of correlated uncertainties that can be stored in digital effects tables through a given measurement function. In the next subsection we discuss how these measurement functions need to be defined in order to use the digital effects tables.

Digital Effects Tables
#######################
Digital Effects tables are created with the obsarray package. The `documentation for obsarray <>`_ is the reference for digital effect tables.
Here we summarise the main concepts in order to give context to the rest of the Section.

Digital effects tables are a digital version of the effects tables created as part of the `FIDUCEO project <https://research.reading.ac.uk/fiduceo/>`_.
Both FIDUCEO effects tables and digital effects tables store information on the uncertainties on a given variable, as well as its error-correlation information (see Figure below).
The error-correlation information often needs to be specified along multiple different dimensions.
For each of these dimensions (or for combinations of them), the correlation structure needs to be defined.
This can be done using an error-correlation matrix, or using the `FIDUCEO correlation forms <https://research.reading.ac.uk/fiduceo/cdr/theoretical-basis-3/4-completing-the-effects-table/>`_.
These FIDUCEO correlation forms essentially provide a parametrisation of the error correlation matrix using a few parameters rather than a full matrix.
These thus require much less memory and are typically the preferred option (though this is not always possible as not all error-correlation matrices can be parameterised in this way).
Some correlation forms, such as e.g. "random" and "systematic" do not require any additional parameters.
Others, such as "triangle_relative", require a parameter that e.g. sets the number of pixels/scanlines being averaged.


.. image:: images/Digital_effects_tables.jpg

*Figure 1 - left: FIDUCEO effects table template. right: obsarray digital effects table for one uncertainty component.*


The obsarray package which implements the digital effects tables, extends the commonly used xarray package.
xarray objects typically have multiple variables with data defined on multiple dimensions and with attributes specifying additional information.
In digital effects tables, each of these variables has one (or more) uncertainty variables associated with it.
Each of these uncertainty components is clearly linked to its associated variable, and has the same dimensions.
These uncertainty components, unsurprisingly, have uncertainties as the data values.
As attributes, they have the information defining the error-correlation structure.
If the FIDUCEO correlation forms can be used, the form name and optionally its parameters are stored directly in the attributes of the uncertainty component.
If the FIDUCEO correlation forms cannot be used, the form in the attributes is listed as custom and as parameter it has the name of another variable in the xarray dataset that has the correlation matrix.

Multiple uncertainty components can be added for the same data variable, and obsarray provide functionality to combine these uncertainties, either as the total uncertainties for a given variable, or as separate random, systematic, and structured components.




Measurement Function
####################
Generally, the measurement function can be written mathematically as:

.. math:: y = f\left( x_{i},\ldots,\ x_{N} \right)

where:

-  :math:`f` is the measurment function;
-  :math:`y` is the measurand;
-  :math:`x_{i}` are the input quantities.

The measurand and input quantities are often vectors consisting of multiple numbers. Here, we choose an example of an ideal gas law equivalent:

.. math:: V = \frac{8.314 \times n T}{P}

where:

-  :math:`V` is the volume;
-  :math:`n` is the amount of substance (number of moles);
-  :math:`T` is the temperature;
-  :math:`P` is the pressure.

Here :math:`V` is now the measurand, and :math:`n`, :math:`T` and :math:`P` are the input quantities.
Digital effects tables for :math:`n`, :math:`T` and :math:`P` will thus need to be specified prior, and punpy will create a digital effects table for :math:`V` as output.

In order to be able to do the uncertainty propagation with these digital effects tables, the measurement functions now need to be defined within a subclass of the MeasurementFunction class provided by punpy.
In this subclass, one can then define the measurement function in python as a function called "function"::

   from punpy import MeasurementFunction

   class GasLaw(MeasurementFunction):
      def function(self, n, T, P):
         return (8.134 * n * T)/P

Propagating uncertainties in digital effects tables
################################################
    
Once this kind of measurement function class is defined, we can initialise an object of this class.
Here, as the first argument, one needs to specify the names of each of the input quantities.
These names have to be in the same order as in the specified function, and need to correspond to the names used for the variables in the digital effects tables.
The second argument specifies whether the Monte Carlo (MC) method (see Section :ref:`Monte Carlo Method`)
or Law of Propagation of Uncertainties (LPU) method (see Section :ref:`LPU Method`) should be used, and further optional keywords give additional options relevant to those methods (e.g. how many MC steps should be used)::

   gl = GasLaw(["n_moles", "temperature", "pressure"], "MC", steps=100000)


Once this object is created, and a digital effects table has been provided (here as a NetCDF file), the uncertainties can be propagated easily::

   import xarray as xr
   ds = xr.open_dataset("digital_effects_table_gaslaw.nc")
   ds_y = gl.propagate_ds("volume", ds)

This generates a digital effects table for the measurand, which could optionally be saved as a NetCDF file, or passed to the next stage of the processing.
The measurand effects table will have separate contributions for the random, systematic and structured uncertainties, which can easily be combined into a single covariance matrix using the obsarray functionalities of the digital effects tables.
As can be seen from the code, the name of the measurand needs to be specified when using the "propagate_ds" function. This measurand name will be used as the variable name in the digital effects table.

It is quite common that not all the uncertainty information is available in a single digital effects table.
In such cases, multiple digital effects tables can simply be provided to "propagate_ds".
punpy will then search each of these effects tables for the input quantities provided when initialising the MeasurementFunction object.
For example, if :math:`n`, :math:`T` and :math:`P`, each had their own digital effects tables, these could be propagated as::

   import xarray as xr
   ds_nmol = xr.open_dataset("n_moles.nc")
   ds_temp = xr.open_dataset("temperature.nc")
    =ds_pres xr.open_dataset("pressure.nc")
   ds_y = gl.propagate_ds("volume", ds_pres, ds_nmol, ds_temp)

These digital effects tables can be provided in any order. They can also contain numerous other quantities that are not relevant for the current measurement function.
When multiple of these digital effects tables have a variable with the same name (which is used in the measurement function), an error is raised.

functions for propagating uncertainties
:::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::
In the above example, we show an example of using the propagate_ds() function to obtain a
measurand effects table that has separate contributions for the random, systematic and structured uncertainties.
Depending on what uncertainty components one is interested in, there are a number of functions that can be used:
-  propagate_ds: measurand digital effects table with separate contributions for the random, systematic and structured uncertainties.
-  propagate_ds_tot: measurand digital effects table with one combined contribution for the total uncertainty (and error correlation matrix).
-  propagate_ds_specific: measurand digital effects table with separate contributions for a list of named uncertainty contributions provided by the user.
-  propagate_ds_all: measurand digital effects table with separate contributions for all the individual uncertainty contributions in the input quantities in the provided input digital effects tables.

It is worth noting that the uncertainty components labelled in the measurand DETs as
"random" or "systematic" (either in propagate_ds, propagate_ds_specific or propagate_ds_all),
will contain the propagated uncertainties for all uncertainty components on the input
quantities that are random or systematic respectively along all the measurand dimensions.
Any uncertainty components on the input quantities where this is not the case (e.g. because
the error correlation along one dimension is random and along another is systematic;
or because one of the error correlations is provided as a numerical error correlation matrix)
will be propagated to the structured uncertainty components on the measurand.

This is somewhat further complicated by the fact that the input quantity dimensions are
not always the same as the measurand dimensions. If any of the measurand dimensions is
not in the input quantity dimensions, some assumption needs to made about how this input
quantity will be correlated along that measurand dimension. Often, such a situation will
simply mean that the same value of the input quantity will be used for every index along
the measurand dimension (broadcasting). This often leads to a systematic correlation along this measurand
dimension (a typical example would be the same spectral gains being applied to multiple
spectral scans in a measurement, where the gains have a wavelength dimension and the
spectral scans have wavelength and scan index dimensions; any error in the gains, will
affect all scans equally). There are however also scenarios where
the introduced error-correlation along the measurand dimension should be random (e.g. if
a constant temperature is assumed and applied along the time dimension, but we know in
reality the temperature is fluctuating randomly w.r.t. to assumed temperature). It can
also be structured. Detailed understanding of the problem is thus required when the measurand
dimensions are not present along the measurand dimensions. These broadcast error correlations can
be set in punpy using ... Depending on how this broadcast error correlation combines with
the error correlations in the other dimensions, can also affect which measurand uncertainty component
(random, systematic or structured) it contributes to when using propagate_ds.

avoiding memory issues in structured components
:::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::
Random and systematic uncertainty components take up very little space, as each of their error
correlation dimensions are by defnition parameterised as random or systematic.
For structured components with error correlation matrices stored as separate variables, it is not
uncommon for these matrices to take up a lot of memory. This is especially the case when
each of the dimensions is not parametrised separately, and instead an error correlation
matrix is provided along the combination of angles. E.g. for a variable with dimensions (x,y,z),
which correspond to a shape of e.g. (20,30,40), the resulting total error correlation matrix will have shape
(20*30*40,20*30*40) which would contain 575 million elements. The shape chosen here as an example is
quite moderate, so it is clear this could be an issue when using larger datasets.

The solution to this is to avoid storing the full (x*y*z,x*y*z) error correlation matrix when possible.
In many cases, even though the errors for pixels along a certain dimension (e.g. x) might
be correlated, this error correlation w.r.t x does not change for different values of y or z.
In that case, the error correlation for x can be separated and stored as a matrix of shape (x,x).

Commit message:

fix bug in ds_propagate err_corr_params

docs/content/punpy_digital_effects_table.rst, after:

.. Overview of method
   Author: Pieter De Vis
   Email: pieter.de.vis@npl.co.uk
   Created: 15/04/20

.. _punpy_digital_effects_table:

punpy in combination with digital effects tables
=======================================================
In this section we explain how punpy can be used for propagating uncertainties in digital effects tables through a measurement function.
For details on how to create these digital effects tables, we refer to the `obsarray documentation <>`_.
Once the digital effects tables are created, this is the most concise method for propagating uncertainties.
The code in this section is just as illustration and we refer to the Examples Section for example with all requied information for running punpy.
The punpy package can propagate the various types of correlated uncertainties that can be stored in digital effects tables through a given measurement function. In the next subsection we discuss how these measurement functions need to be defined in order to use the digital effects tables.

Digital Effects Tables
#######################
Digital Effects tables are created with the obsarray package. The `documentation for obsarray <>`_ is the reference for digital effect tables.
Here we summarise the main concepts in order to give context to the rest of the Section.

Digital effects tables are a digital version of the effects tables created as part of the `FIDUCEO project <https://research.reading.ac.uk/fiduceo/>`_.
Both FIDUCEO effects tables and digital effects tables store information on the uncertainties on a given variable, as well as its error-correlation information (see Figure below).
The error-correlation information often needs to be specified along multiple different dimensions.
For each of these dimensions (or for combinations of them), the correlation structure needs to be defined.
This can be done using an error-correlation matrix, or using the `FIDUCEO correlation forms <https://research.reading.ac.uk/fiduceo/cdr/theoretical-basis-3/4-completing-the-effects-table/>`_.
These FIDUCEO correlation forms essentially provide a parametrisation of the error correlation matrix using a few parameters rather than a full matrix.
These thus require much less memory and are typically the preferred option (though this is not always possible as not all error-correlation matrices can be parameterised in this way).
Some correlation forms, such as e.g. "random" and "systematic" do not require any additional parameters.
Others, such as "triangle_relative", require a parameter that e.g. sets the number of pixels/scanlines being averaged.


.. image:: images/Digital_effects_tables.jpg

*Figure 1 - left: FIDUCEO effects table template. right: obsarray digital effects table for one uncertainty component.*


The obsarray package which implements the digital effects tables, extends the commonly used xarray package.
xarray objects typically have multiple variables with data defined on multiple dimensions and with attributes specifying additional information.
In digital effects tables, each of these variables has one (or more) uncertainty variables associated with it.
Each of these uncertainty components is clearly linked to its associated variable, and has the same dimensions.
These uncertainty components, unsurprisingly, have uncertainties as the data values.
As attributes, they have the information defining the error-correlation structure.
If the FIDUCEO correlation forms can be used, the form name and optionally its parameters are stored directly in the attributes of the uncertainty component.
If the FIDUCEO correlation forms cannot be used, the form in the attributes is listed as custom and as parameter it has the name of another variable in the xarray dataset that has the correlation matrix.

Multiple uncertainty components can be added for the same data variable, and obsarray provide functionality to combine these uncertainties, either as the total uncertainties for a given variable, or as separate random, systematic, and structured components.




Measurement Function
####################
Generally, the measurement function can be written mathematically as:

.. math:: y = f\left( x_{i},\ldots,\ x_{N} \right)

where:

-  :math:`f` is the measurment function;
-  :math:`y` is the measurand;
-  :math:`x_{i}` are the input quantities.

The measurand and input quantities are often vectors consisting of multiple numbers. Here, we choose an example of an ideal gas law equivalent:

.. math:: V = \frac{8.314 \times n T}{P}

where:

-  :math:`V` is the volume;
-  :math:`n` is the amount of substance (number of moles);
-  :math:`T` is the temperature;
-  :math:`P` is the pressure.

Here :math:`V` is now the measurand, and :math:`n`, :math:`T` and :math:`P` are the input quantities.
Digital effects tables for :math:`n`, :math:`T` and :math:`P` will thus need to be specified prior, and punpy will create a digital effects table for :math:`V` as output.

In order to be able to do the uncertainty propagation with these digital effects tables, the measurement functions now need to be defined within a subclass of the MeasurementFunction class provided by punpy.
In this subclass, one can then define the measurement function in python as a function called "function"::

   from punpy import MeasurementFunction

   class GasLaw(MeasurementFunction):
      def function(self, n, T, P):
         return (8.134 * n * T)/P

Propagating uncertainties in digital effects tables
####################################################
    
Once this kind of measurement function class is defined, we can initialise an object of this class.
Here, as the first argument, one needs to specify the names of each of the input quantities.
These names have to be in the same order as in the specified function, and need to correspond to the names used for the variables in the digital effects tables.
The second argument specifies whether the Monte Carlo (MC) method (see Section :ref:`Monte Carlo Method`)
or Law of Propagation of Uncertainties (LPU) method (see Section :ref:`LPU Method`) should be used, and further optional keywords give additional options relevant to those methods (e.g. how many MC steps should be used)::

   gl = GasLaw(["n_moles", "temperature", "pressure"], "MC", steps=100000)


Once this object is created, and a digital effects table has been provided (here as a NetCDF file), the uncertainties can be propagated easily::

   import xarray as xr
   ds = xr.open_dataset("digital_effects_table_gaslaw.nc")
   ds_y = gl.propagate_ds("volume", ds)

This generates a digital effects table for the measurand, which could optionally be saved as a NetCDF file, or passed to the next stage of the processing.
The measurand effects table will have separate contributions for the random, systematic and structured uncertainties, which can easily be combined into a single covariance matrix using the obsarray functionalities of the digital effects tables.
As can be seen from the code, the name of the measurand needs to be specified when using the "propagate_ds" function. This measurand name will be used as the variable name in the digital effects table.

It is quite common that not all the uncertainty information is available in a single digital effects table.
In such cases, multiple digital effects tables can simply be provided to "propagate_ds".
punpy will then search each of these effects tables for the input quantities provided when initialising the MeasurementFunction object.
For example, if :math:`n`, :math:`T` and :math:`P`, each had their own digital effects tables, these could be propagated as::

   import xarray as xr
   ds_nmol = xr.open_dataset("n_moles.nc")
   ds_temp = xr.open_dataset("temperature.nc")
    =ds_pres xr.open_dataset("pressure.nc")
   ds_y = gl.propagate_ds("volume", ds_pres, ds_nmol, ds_temp)

These digital effects tables can be provided in any order. They can also contain numerous other quantities that are not relevant for the current measurement function.
When multiple of these digital effects tables have a variable with the same name (which is used in the measurement function), an error is raised.

functions for propagating uncertainties
:::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::
In the above example, we show an example of using the propagate_ds() function to obtain a
measurand effects table that has separate contributions for the random, systematic and structured uncertainties.
Depending on what uncertainty components one is interested in, there are a number of functions that can be used:
-  propagate_ds: measurand digital effects table with separate contributions for the random, systematic and structured uncertainties.
-  propagate_ds_tot: measurand digital effects table with one combined contribution for the total uncertainty (and error correlation matrix).
-  propagate_ds_specific: measurand digital effects table with separate contributions for a list of named uncertainty contributions provided by the user.
-  propagate_ds_all: measurand digital effects table with separate contributions for all the individual uncertainty contributions in the input quantities in the provided input digital effects tables.

It is worth noting that the uncertainty components labelled in the measurand DETs as
"random" or "systematic" (either in propagate_ds, propagate_ds_specific or propagate_ds_all),
will contain the propagated uncertainties for all uncertainty components on the input
quantities that are random or systematic respectively along all the measurand dimensions.
Any uncertainty components on the input quantities where this is not the case (e.g. because
the error correlation along one dimension is random and along another is systematic;
or because one of the error correlations is provided as a numerical error correlation matrix)
will be propagated to the structured uncertainty components on the measurand.

This is somewhat further complicated by the fact that the input quantity dimensions are
not always the same as the measurand dimensions. If any of the measurand dimensions is
not in the input quantity dimensions, some assumption needs to made about how this input
quantity will be correlated along that measurand dimension. Often, such a situation will
simply mean that the same value of the input quantity will be used for every index along
the measurand dimension (broadcasting). This often leads to a systematic correlation along this measurand
dimension (a typical example would be the same spectral gains being applied to multiple
spectral scans in a measurement, where the gains have a wavelength dimension and the
spectral scans have wavelength and scan index dimensions; any error in the gains, will
affect all scans equally). There are however also scenarios where
the introduced error-correlation along the measurand dimension should be random (e.g. if
a constant temperature is assumed and applied along the time dimension, but we know in
reality the temperature is fluctuating randomly w.r.t. to assumed temperature). It can
also be structured. Detailed understanding of the problem is thus required when the measurand
dimensions are not present along the measurand dimensions. These broadcast error correlations can
be set in punpy using ... Depending on how this broadcast error correlation combines with
the error correlations in the other dimensions, can also affect which measurand uncertainty component
(random, systematic or structured) it contributes to when using propagate_ds.

avoiding memory issues in structured components
:::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::
Random and systematic uncertainty components take up very little space, as each of their error
correlation dimensions are by defnition parameterised as random or systematic.
For structured components with error correlation matrices stored as separate variables, it is not
uncommon for these matrices to take up a lot of memory. This is especially the case when
each of the dimensions is not parametrised separately, and instead an error correlation
matrix is provided along the combination of angles. E.g. for a variable with dimensions (x,y,z),
which correspond to a shape of e.g. (20,30,40), the resulting total error correlation matrix will have shape
(20*30*40,20*30*40) which would contain 575 million elements. The shape chosen here as an example is
quite moderate, so it is clear this could be an issue when using larger datasets.

The solution to this is to avoid storing the full (x*y*z,x*y*z) error correlation matrix when possible.
In many cases, even though the errors for pixels along a certain dimension (e.g. x) might
be correlated, this error correlation w.r.t x does not change for different values of y or z.
In that case, the error correlation for x can be separated and stored as a matrix of shape (x,x).

This can be achieved by setting the using the use_err_corr_dict keyword::


   prop = MCPropagation(1000, dtype="float32", verbose=False)

   gl = IdealGasLaw(
      prop,
      ["pressure", "temperature", "n_moles"],
      "volume",
      yunit="m^3",
      use_err_corr_dict=True,
   )
